# GPS-Based-Date-Time-Clock
Arduino and Adafruit Ultimate GPS Clock using MAX7219 (8 Digit, 7-Segment Display Drivers)

This Arduino sketch began with the max7219.h/.cpp library by Johnathan Evans.  Since this project has two or more displays (at this time), Mr. Evan's library would not work, but it was a great starting point. I attempted to use other libraries that support one or several MAX7219 drivers, but I could not get them to work at all. I used the concepts from Mr. Evan's work and began writing the Arduino sketch to not use any library functions. Writing code to remove the max7219.h libtary was successful.  At this point, the clock project is functioning and work on the circuit boards has begun.

This project uses an Arduino Uno (Nanos work too), an Adafruit Ultimate GPS v3, two MAX7219 display drivers, and sixteen 7-segment 1.3" tall display modules. Basically, the code receives GPS output via a 9600 baud serial connection.  It waits until a valid $GPRMC sentence is received, then parses the DATE and TIME fields to two strings.  Each character of each digit (or character) (DATE and TIME) is evaluated, converted to the necessary binary 8-bit sequence to represent which LEDs to turn on in each 7-segment display.

Since the MAX7219 cannot be addressed individually, the code must sent 16 bits at a time for each 7-segment display as serial output.  Since more than one MAX7219 is daisy-chained together, 16 x (No. of MAX7219 devices)-bits need to be sent for each digit.  For two displays of eight 7-segment modules (16 digits), you would have to send 256 bits.  The MAX7219 requires 16 bits for each digit.  These are sent as 8 bits for the address of the segment then 8-bits that represent the 7-segments to turn on. This is repeated for all eight digits in each display.  Therefore 256 bits are sent to complete one instance of DATE; i.e., 20240420 (20 Apr 2024) and TIME; i.e, 00153020 (3:15 PM and 20 seconds).  The first two digits of the TIME (00) are not displayed because the MAX7219 is configured (via the code (address 0x0b)) to only display the right 6 digits; i.e., 153020, of the time display.

The MAX7219 displays each digit by determining its position address (1 to 8) and then sending the 7-segment binary pattern to display.  The position address is 8 bits (only bits 0-3 are used) and the binary address is 8 bits (16 bits total).  Additionally, special functions in the MAX7219 are configured using the same pattern; i.e., address (opcode) then data.  Special functions include: how many digits to display (SCAN-LIMIT), intensity, test pattern, run/shutdown, and digit decoder type.

Later, three switches were added that interface to Arduino input pins. These control Daylight Savings Time (on/off), date display format (YYYYMMDD or MMDDYYYY), and how the Julian Day number is shown; i.e, YYDDD or only DDD.
